#Linux Interview questions

1) What is the use of echo command? 
Ans : echo command is used to display the text or values on the terminal

2) How to check computer name or hostname in Linux ?
Ans : we can check using 'hostname' command

3) How to check the current user in Linux terminal ?
Ans : we can check using 'whoami' command

4) How to check your current path or directory  you're working in ?
Ans : using 'pwd' command

5) Explain the difference between relative and absolute path. 
Ans : Relative Path - start from current working directory
      Absolute Path - The full path to a file or directory

6) Which command is used to create a file in Linux ?
Ans : touch file_name;  vi file_name;  vim file_name; nano file_name;

7) How will you edit an existing file on a Linux server ?
Ans : using  command like :  vim file_name;  nano file_name;

8) How to rename a file in Linux ?
Ans : using 'mv' command
      mv old_file_name  new_file_name;

9) How to search for a string in Linux ?
Ans : using 'grep' command
      grep word_to_be_searched  file_name;

10) Difference between grep and egrep ?
Ans : In egrep, you can search for more than one string at same time
      Syntax : egrep "key1|key2|key3" file_name;
      Ex: egrep "john|khaja" names.txt

11) How can you read a file without using cat command ?
Ans : You can read the contents of a file in several ways without using the cat command
      You can use "less" and "more" commands
      less file_name;
      more file_name;

12) What is the advantage of using less command ?
Ans : less command allows you to view text one screen at a time. This is useful for navigating through large files or long command outputs. You can scroll up and down easily using the arrow keys
      You can search for specific text within the file by typing / followed by the search term and pressing Enter. This makes it easy to locate and highlight specific content in the file.
      In addition to scrolling, less provides navigation features. You can move forward one page at a time with the spacebar, move backward with the b key, and jump to the beginning or end of the file with g and G respectively. This makes it more versatile for exploring file contents.

13) How to check a file's permissions ?
Ans : using command "ls -l"
      using command "getfacl file_name"; 
      getfacl command is used to retrieve and display the Access Control Lists (ACLs) of files and directories. ACLs provide a more fine-grained level of permissions than the traditional owner-group-world permission system.
      output of getfacl command will be like below :

      # file: /path/to/file
      # owner: user1
      # group: group1
      user::rwx
      group::r--
      other::---

14) How to check the IP of your linux server ?
Ans : using command "ifconfig" and "ip addr"

15) How to read the top 5 lines in a file ?
Ans : using command "head -n 5 file_name";

16) How to read the last 5 lines in a file ?
Ans : using command "tail -n 5 file_name";

17) How to list hidden files ?
Ans : use the command "ls -la"

18) How to see all the recently used commands ?
Ans : using the command "history"

19) What is root ?
Ans : root is the admin or super user
      The root user has the highest level of privileges and can perform tasks that regular users cannot, such as modifying system files and installing software system-wide.
      The forward slash (/) is also called the "root directory." It is the top-level directory in the file system hierarchy. All other directories and files are located beneath the root directory. For example, /home is a subdirectory of the root directory.

20) What is inode and how to find it for a file?
Ans : inode (index node)
      It contains metadata about the file, excluding its name and actual data. 
      inode conntains file_type, file_permissions, file_size, Timestamps: Information about when the file was created, last accessed, and last modified.

      use command "ls -li file_name" (for a specific file)
      use command "ls -li" (for all the files)

21) Which command can you use for finding files on Linux system ?
Ans : using "find" and "locate" commands
      Ex : locate names.txt (this command gives the full path of names.txt file as output)

22) Commands for counting words and lines ?
Ans : wc file_Name;  (for word count)
      wc -l file_name;  (for line count)

23) How can you combine two commands?
Ans : we can do by using pipe (|)
      command1 | command2;
      the output of first command is given as input to the second command

24) How to view the difference between two files ?
Ans : using "diff" command
      diff file1 file2;

25) What is the use of shred command ?
Ans : shred command is used to delete a file permanently which is unable to recover
      shred -u file_name;
      shred --remove file_name;

26) How to check system architecture info ?
Ans : using "lscpu" and "dmidecode" commands

27) How to combbine two files ?
Ans : using command " cat file1 file2 > file3"

28) How can you find the type of file ?
Ans : using command "file file_name";

29) How to sort the content of a file ?
Ans : usinf command " sort file_name";

30) Different ways to access a Linux server remotely? (from a windows machine)
Ans : using external tools like "putty, gitbash etc"













      




